Add release notes for 0.214 (#11938)
prestodb/presto: presto-docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-0.214.rst

=============
Release 0.214
=============

General Changes
---------------

> * Add feature and session toggles for *top-N row number* optimization.

Reviewer: We don't use italics.

Reviewer 2: This should specify the configuration property and session property names. See previous release notes for the standard way that we phrase this.

Reviewer 2: I think it's fine to use them here.

> * Add `ngrams` function to generate the N-grams from an array.

Reviewer: Functions are prefixed by `:func:` so that they act as links. Check other release notes.

* Add `qdigest` type and associated functions.

> * Add statistics calculator support for `TINYINT`, `SMALLINT` and `VARBINARY` literals.

Reviewer: Double ticks ``

=============
Release 0.214
=============

General Changes
---------------

* Add feature and session toggles for *top-N row number* optimization.

> * Add ``ngrams`` function to generate the N-grams from an array.

Reviewer 3: The previous release notes actually included links to the documentation, let's consider?  Same applies to below too.

Reviewer 2: ```
* Add :func:`ngrams` function to generate the N-grams from an array.

> * Add ``qdigest`` type and associated functions.

Reviewer 2: This should link to the type and function documentation.

> * Add statistics calculator support for ``TINYINT``, ``SMALLINT`` and ``VARBINARY`` literals.

Reviewer 2: Please explain this in terms of end-user impact. Or is this an internal-only feature that doesn't need to be documented?

Author: @sopel39 is there a user-visible change to document here? Reading #11743, it looks like it improve the cost-estimation with scalar and magic and functions.

Reviewer 4: It impacts query planning. Without those changes, we've seen queries greatly misetimated and multiple times more expensive to run. Therefore it is user-visible change.

Reviewer 4: Maybe it should be rephased to:
```
Add CBO support for ``TINYINT``, ``SMALLINT`` and ``VARBINARY`` literals, which improves planning and query times.
```

> * Add system to delay query execution until a minimum number of workers nodes are available. If the requirement is not met within a time limit, the query is failed.

Reviewer 2: Wrap lines as appropriate at ~80 characters to improve readability. This is subjective. For example, if something is 100 characters, it's more readable not to wrap.

> * Improve error message for broken :func:``array_sort`` comparator.

Reviewer: Single ticks

> * Fix memory leak related to query tracking in coordinator. Completed queries are supposed to be purged shortly after its completion. However, a 0.213 regression broke this.

Reviewer: ```
Fix memory leak related to query tracking in coordinator. 
```
is enough.

> * Lazily build hash table for ``MapBlock`` when the hash table is used in ``SingleMapBlock``.

Reviewer 3: Should this be framed somehow in terms of how this will affect the administrator or user of Presto?

Author: Discussed offline with @raghavsethi. We decided to remove it.

Reviewer 2: This is a substantial performance improvement that we definitely should mention. However, it needs to be phrased in terms of user impact, not implementation details. For example:
```
* Improve performance of queries that read maps but do not access any keys
  by building the hash table lazily.
```
(assuming the above description is accurate)

* Make planning more stable with regard to query predicates and joins.

> * Make distributed ``ORDER BY`` and aggregation unspill progress on early yield signals.

Reviewer 2: This seems to be missing a word or is otherwise off, as I don't understand it.

> * Make distributed ``ORDER BY`` and aggregation unspill progress on early yield signals.

Reviewer 5: What does making “planning more stable” mean in this context? What’s the user-visible effect?

Reviewer 4: If you write filter `a = b AND b = c` it won't be reordered to `b = c AND a = b` as often as previously. If it's too vague we can remove it

Author: From our example, the outcome is to produce a query plan that matches user's expectations by being consistent with the order of predicates and joins in the original SQL statement. It has performance implication if the author of the query expected to short-circuit more often in the order they write the predicate.

What about:

```
* Maintain order of predicates and join tables in the query plan
```
?

* Make *top-N row number* optimization work in some cases when columns are pruned.

> * Print distribution type for semi-joins in explain plans.

Reviewer 2: Print -> Include

Reviewer 5: Also, it should be “in EXPLAIN output”. There’s no such a thing as “explain plans”

* Replace ``Math.floorMod()`` with faster range reduction function in map hash table operations.
* Remove experimental pre-allocated memory system, and the related configuration property ``experimental.preallocate-memory-threshold``. The minimum number of workers can be set

>   with the ``query-manager.required-workers`` configuration property, and the max wait time can ``query-manager.required-workers-max-wait`` configuration property.

Reviewer 2: Let's split these two sentences into separate items. The latter may have been intended as a replacement for the former, but it is an independent feature.

The second "can" is missing some words after it.

> * Fix bug where the CLI throws a vague error ``Query gone(server restarted?)`` instead of actual ``Exception`` message.

Reviewer 2: CLI changes should be in a separate section (see previous release notes). However, this is a server side fix, not specific to the CLI.
```
* Send proper error response to client for certain types of errors during query creation.

JDBC Driver Changes
-------------------

* Clear update count after calling ``Statement.getMoreResults()``.

Hive Changes
------------

> * Add ``hive.s3.upload-acl-type`` config option to specify the canned ACL to use while uploading files to S3.

Reviewer 2: config option -> configuration property

* Add Hive metastore API recording tool for remote debugging purpose.

> * Prevent ORC writer from writing stripes larger than the maximum configured size when ``Page`` produced by a Presto operator is huge (#11717).

Reviewer 2: We normally write release notes in this order: fixes, improvements, additions

Use the `:isssue:` role rather than the raw number (see previous release notes)

We also should describe this in terms of user impact and not mention internal details. I think we can simplify this:
```
* Prevent ORC writer from writing stripes larger than the maximum configured size.

* Retry on metastore connection errors.

> * Support reading DWRF flat map.

Reviewer 2: We can remove this no one uses DWRF

> Security

Reviewer 2: Security Changes

Also, this section should go before connectors

--------

>  * Add ``security.refresh-period`` parameter to file-based access controllers that allows to reload their configuration.

Reviewer 2: Add newline after section header

Verifier Changes
----------------

* Handle SQL execution timeouts while rewriting queries.

Web UI Changes
--------------

> * Add warnings to the query detail page.

Reviewer 2: Newline after section header

Move section to be before connectors

Reviewer 2: ```
* Show query warnings on the query detail page.

> * Fix bug that prevented non-default sort orders from being selected in query list view.

Reviewer 2: "Fix a bug" is generally a sign that the item should be rewritten. How about
```
* Allow selecting non-default sort orders in query list view.

Author: It was actually a regression introduced in the Previous release. Should we emphasize that to show that this release will fix the bug?

=============
Release 0.214
=============

General Changes
---------------

* Fix memory leak related to query tracking in coordinator that was introduced
  in 0.213.

> * Send proper error response to client for certain types of errors during query

Reviewer 6: Hm. I hope we now send proper error response for _all_ types of errors, not just _certain types_.
-- Since this sentence does not contain "Fix", it can be misunderstood. I think i understand this only because I know the related PR.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, this needs further re-wording.

  creation.
* Improve error message when comparator provided to :func:`array_sort` function

>   doesn’t satisfy the required contract.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  does not satisfy the required contract.
```

(i think this is a general rule for RNs)

* Improve query performance...??Lazily build hash table for ``MapBlock`` when

>   the hash table is used in ``SingleMapBlock``.

Reviewer 6: > Improve query performance...??Lazily build hash

TODO

> * Improve planning more stable with regard to query predicates and joins.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Make planning more stable with regard to query predicates and joins.
```

Also, "more stable" is pretty vague for release notes. Maybe we just scrap this item?

Author: See [discussion](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/11938#discussion_r234465250)

* Improve planning and query performance for queries with ``TINYINT``,
  ``SMALLINT`` and ``VARBINARY`` literals.

> * Make distributed ``ORDER BY`` and aggregation unspill progress on early yield

Reviewer: Fix issue where queries containing distributed ``ORDER BY`` and aggregation could sometimes fail to make progress when data was spilled.

> * Faster range reduction function in map hash table operations.

Reviewer 6: Should this be in a form of a sentence?

Reviewer 5: Also, this still is too much implementation detail. I’d just say “improve performance for lookup operations on map data types” (assuming that’s where it helps). We can link to the issue if needed for anyone that wants more details.

Author: The associated commit was 290f5be. The changes are in the same scope as 23de11f and improve the performance of building the internal hash table that represents map data types.

I'm keeping your suggestions:
> * Improve performance for lookup operations on map data types.

And using it for the two commits rather than providing two low-level entries.

* Add feature and session toggles for top-N row number optimization.
* Add :func:`ngrams` function to generate the N-grams from an array.
* Add :ref:`qdigest <qdigest_type>` type and associated :doc:`qdigest`
  functions.
* Add statistics calculator support for ``TINYINT``, ``SMALLINT`` and
  ``VARBINARY`` literals.
* Add functionality to delay query execution until a minimum number of workers
  nodes is available. The minimum number of workers can be set with the
  ``query-manager.required-workers`` configuration property, and the max wait
  time can ``query-manager.required-workers-max-wait`` configuration property.
* Remove experimental pre-allocated memory system, and the related configuration
  property ``experimental.preallocate-memory-threshold``.

> Security

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Security Changes
```

--------

 * Add ``security.refresh-period`` configuration property to file-based access
   controllers that allows to reload their configuration.

JDBC Driver Changes
-------------------

* Clear update count after calling ``Statement.getMoreResults()``.

Verifier Changes
----------------

* Handle SQL execution timeouts while rewriting queries.

Web UI Changes
--------------

* Show query warnings on the query detail page.
* Allow selecting non-default sort orders in query list view.

> Hive Changes

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Hive Connector Changes
```

------------

* Prevent ORC writer from writing stripes larger than the maximum configured size.
* Add ``hive.s3.upload-acl-type`` configuration property to specify the canned
  ACL to use while uploading files to S3.

> * Add Hive metastore API recording tool for remote debugging purpose.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Add Hive metastore API recording tool for remote debugging purposes.
```

=============
Release 0.214
=============

General Changes
---------------

* Fix history leak in coordinator for failed or canceled queries.
* Fix memory leak related to query tracking in coordinator that was introduced
  in 0.213.
* Fix planning failures when lambdas are used in join filter expression.

> * Send proper error response to client for certain types of errors during query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix responses to client for certain types of errors that are encountered during query creation.
```

  creation.

> * Improve error message when comparator provided to :func:`array_sort` function

Reviewer: Improve error message when invalid comparator is provided to the :func:`array_sort` function.

  does not satisfy the required contract.

> * Improve performance for lookup operations on map data types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve performance of lookup operations on map data types.
```

> * Improve planning and query times for queries with ``TINYINT``, ``SMALLINT``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve planning and query performance for queries with ``TINYINT``, ``SMALLINT``
```

  and ``VARBINARY`` literals.

> * Maintain order of predicates and join tables in the query plan.

Reviewer: Let's just remove this.

> * Make distributed ``ORDER BY`` and aggregation unspill progress on early yield

Reviewer: Don't understand this. Which commit is it?

Author: Seems to be introduced by c528f8

  signals.
* Make top-N row number optimization work in some cases when columns are pruned.

> * Add session feature toggle ``optimizer.optimize-to-n-row-number`` for top-N

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add session property ``optimize-top-n-row-number`` and configuration property ``optimizer.optimize-top-n-row-number`` to toggle the top N row number optimization.
```
@electrum : This is a bit sketchy.

  row number optimization (enabled by default)

> * Add :func:`ngrams` function to generate the N-grams from an array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add :func:`ngrams` function to generate N-grams from an array.
```

* Add :ref:`qdigest <qdigest_type>` type and associated :doc:`qdigest`
  functions.
* Add functionality to delay query execution until a minimum number of workers

>   nodes is available. The minimum number of workers can be set with the

Reviewer 2: is -> are

>   nodes is available. The minimum number of workers can be set with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  nodes is available. The minimum number of workers can be set using the
```

  ``query-manager.required-workers`` configuration property, and the max wait

>   time can ``query-manager.required-workers-max-wait`` configuration property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  time can be set using the ``query-manager.required-workers-max-wait`` configuration property.
```

* Remove experimental pre-allocated memory system, and the related configuration
  property ``experimental.preallocate-memory-threshold``.

Security Changes
----------------

 * Add ``security.refresh-period`` configuration property to file-based access

>    controllers that allows to reload their configuration.

Reviewer 2: This sounds strange

Author: Is it better?

>  * Add ``security.refresh-period`` configuration property to allow to reload the
   configuration of file-based access controllers.

The related change is e748ffe.

>    controllers that allows to reload their configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   controllers to control how often their configuration file is reloaded.
```

JDBC Driver Changes
-------------------

* Clear update count after calling ``Statement.getMoreResults()``.

Verifier Changes
----------------

> * Handle SQL execution timeouts while rewriting queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve handling of SQL execution timeouts while rewriting queries.
```
